The field of materials informatics1,2 suffers from lack of data readiness and
data accessibility. Although materials data can be systematically generated
through computational and physical experiments, a substantial amount of
historical data is trapped in published literature.An ever-growing volume of
data is continually released in scientific journal articles, but this data frequently
exists in unstructured natural language text formats, posing challenges
for immediate utilization by modern informatics that rely on the
availability of structured datasets. Natural language processing (NLP)
techniques implemented in materials science seek to automatically extract
materials insights,materials properties, and synthesis data from a corpus of
text documents, and propose hypotheses and designs for new materials3–5.
After acquiring the corpus, a series of complex NLP operations are performed
which include turning texts into smaller units called tokens,
recognizing key entities (such as materials, characterization methods, or
properties) using named entity recognition (NER) methods, creating rulebased
algorithms to identify relationships between the entities through
dependency parsing, and finally, extracting information and organizing it
into a structured format6.
With the advent of modern machine learning (ML) and artificial
intelligence techniques, deep learning models including recurrent neural
networks and long short-termmemory architectures have become valuable
for NER tasks7,8. In recent years, the transformer-based BERT architecture,
with its ability to capture contextual and semantic relationships within
scientific texts9, has especially demonstrated superior performance compared
to traditional neural networkmodels10.We have previously developed
and published MaterialsBERT11, a NER model derived from
PubMedBERT12. This model demonstrated superior performance on publicly
available datasets in comparison to other BERT models, including
ChemBERT13 and MatBERT14, particularly for materials science-specific
data extraction tasks. By employing a MaterialsBERT-based pipeline, we
successfully extracted over 300,000 polymer-property records from
approximately 130,000 abstracts, the largest such undertaking at that time,
with the data made publicly available15. This data extraction approach
demonstrated the effectiveness of the MaterialsBERTmodel in processing a
substantial volume of abstracts to obtain polymer-property information.
The potential for large-scale data extraction usingMaterialsBERT from the
full texts of journal articles presents a further new opportunity formaterials
data acquisition.
While NER models excel in identifying named entities within texts,
discerning entity relationships across extended passages encompassing multiple sentences solely through recognized named entities continues to be
a challenge16. This limitation is particularly pronounced in technical and
scientific documents, where critical information is often expressed in a nonstandard
and complex manner. In the domain of polymer science, NERbased
extraction methods encounter additional specific challenges stemming
from the expansive chemical design space of the materials and the
utilization of non-standard nomenclature, including commonly used
names, acronyms, synonyms, and historical terms17.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) such as Generative Pretrained
Transformer (GPT), Large Language Model Meta AI (LlaMa), Pathways
Language Model, etc., have gained significant attention in the field of natural
language processing18,19. These models have shown remarkable performance
in handling various NLP tasks, showcasing their robustness and
versatility20, especially in high-performance text classification, NER, and
extractive question answering with limited datasets21. A key factor contributing
to the success of the LLMs is the vast amount of ‘knowledge’ these
models gain during semi-supervised pre-training (e.g., using masked languagemodeling
to predict the next token given a set of preceding tokens for
context)22. In the pre-training phase, LLMs acquire a foundational comprehension
of language semantics and contextual understanding through
exposure to training datasets, which typically comprise texts from general
science and scientific literature23. Subsequently, the pre-trained LLMs, also
referred to as base models, undergo supervised fine-tuning to produce
desired text outputs in response to specific prompts or instructions.
Examples include OpenAI Codex and Code LlaMa, both of which are finetuned
to generate code snippets based on a given natural language input24.
Similarly, ChatGPT and LlaMa Chat models are language models finetuned
to respond to user prompts or instructions conversationally while
maintaining a history of previous interactions for added context for the
conversation. A human-like understanding of the language semantics and
subsequent instruction tuning thus enable the LLMs to perform in-domain
tasks such as information extraction about a specific material class with no
(zero-shot) to only a few task-specific examples (few-shots). Such ability
offers excellent performance and eliminates the efforts needed to create a
labeled dataset of significant volume and train or fine-tune a new model25.
Despite the potential formany use cases including data extraction, the
improved capabilities of the LLMs depend on access to significant computational
resources. 